feat: adds enumerations (#695)
openwdl/wdl: SPEC.md

Note that the ability to assign values to `Struct` declarations other than struct literals is deprecated and will be removed in WDL 2.0.

> ##### Enumeration Types (Enums)

Reviewer: Some place in this section I think we need a paragraph on what constitutes a _compatible definition_ of an enum for the purpose of resolving name conflicts in imported types.

I would like the order of the variant declarations to be relevant for determining compatible definitions in case we add the ability to reflect on an enum's type (e.g. a hypothetical `values` function that takes the enum type and returns `Array[T]`) in the future.

Author: Okay, I suppose I'm in favor of enforcing the order of variants when considering whether two definitions are equal. I'll add this language in.

Reviewer 2: do we specify anywhere the expected order order of import resolution? I would imagine in order for this to be true, we would need some sort of engine agnostic and deterministic heuristic for evaluating a WDL

Reviewer 3: Ya can we get some clarification.

> An enumeration (or "enum") is a closed set of enumerated values (known as "variants") that are considered semantically valid in a specific context. An enum is defined at the top-level of the WDL document and can be used as a declaration type anywhere in the document.

Reviewer 4: re `variant` - couple of thoughts here:

1) Given the domain we're in, this feels like it could get confusing due to terminology overload
2) It feels very Rust-y. Traditionally the model has been to use Python as a guide for terminology and syntax

Reviewer 3: I agree I would change to not be variants. Maybe `options` or `allowed values`

Author: Agree. I'll find something less Rust-y.

Author: I've been thinking about it, and the two best choices (no pun intended) are:

- "Member", which is what Python uses. Member does conflict logically with members of a struct though which operate differently.
- "Choice", which is a bit informal but clearly defines the idea while using a word not already claimed in the spec.

For now, I've updated this to "choice" but I'm open to feedback on this (or if there are any other names people think are better).

Reviewer: I don't have a strong preference, but if I had to rank those choices, I think my ranking would be:

1. `variant`
2. `choice`
3. `member`

I can acknowledge that `variant` seems overly formal, but I also think that `member` isn't quite right either. `choice` seems like an okay compromise that conveys it being specifically related to an enum.

* Implicitly typed enums are enums where each assigned value can be unambiguously mapped to a single [primitive type](#primitive-types) and, thus, does not need the type to be specified in brackets. Enums that are implicitly typed and for which no values are assigned are assumed to be `String`-valued where each value is a `String` that matches the variant name. Importantly, all assigned values within an implicitly typed enum must have the same type or an error is thrown.

```wdl
# An explicitly typed enum that is `Float`-valued.
enum FruitCosts[Float] {
  Banana = 1.33,
  Orange = 2.20,
  Apple = 3.47
}

# An explicitly typed enum that is `Float`-valued. Because the enum is
# explicitly typed, the `ThreePointOh` variant can be coerced to a `Float`,
# which is a valid enumeration definition.
enum FavoriteFloat[Float] {
  ThreePointOh = 3,
  FourPointOh = 4.0
}

# ERROR: because the enum is implicitly typed, the type cannot be unambiguously
# resolved, which results in an error.
enum FavoriteNumber {
  ThreePointOh = 3,
  FourPointOh = 4.0

> }

Reviewer: Given other places where we deduce a common type in WDL (e.g. `[1, 2.0]` -> `Array[Float]`), I would expect this to unambiguously resolve to `Float` as all of the assigned types coerce to it, rather than be considered an error.

I would expect it to error if the first assignment was to `"3"`, for example.

Reviewer: Additionally, given that the type parameter to the enum declaration is required to be primitive and that there aren't that many primitive type coercions, I wonder if we can do without supporting an explicit syntax, at least initially.

The only use I can foresee with explicitly specifying the type would be if one wanted to have an enum of `File` or `Directory`, which makes little sense to me (an enum of `String` would have its values implicitly coerced to `File` and `Directory` where needed anyway).

Reviewer: Although, reading it again, there doesn't seem to be an explicit requirement that a type in the _explicit syntax_ be primitive. Can we do something like:

```wdl
enum Foo[Array[String]] {
   Foo = ["foo", "bar", "baz"],
   Bar = ["qux", "quux", "quuux"],
}
```
?

If this is desired, then we probably should support the explicit syntax. If not, I personally think we can eliminate it.

Additionally, we should call out that the RHS expression in the assignment must only contain literal expressions and that string interpolation isn't supported in this context as these are global declarations.

Author: > Given other places where we deduce a common type in WDL (e.g. `[1, 2.0]` -> `Array[Float]`), I would expect this to unambiguously resolve to `Float` as all of the assigned types coerce to it, rather than be considered an error.
> 
> 
> 
> I would expect it to error if the first assignment was to `"3"`, for example.

Ah yes, you are correct. I will update this example.

Author: > Although, reading it again, there doesn't seem to be an explicit requirement that a type in the _explicit syntax_ be primitive. Can we do something like:
> 
> 
> 
> ```wdl
> 
> enum Foo[Array[String]] {
> 
>    Foo = ["foo", "bar", "baz"],
> 
>    Bar = ["qux", "quux", "quuux"],
> 
> }
> 
> ```
> 
> ?
> 
> 
> 
> If this is desired, then we probably should support the explicit syntax. If not, I personally think we can eliminate it.
> 
> 
> 
> Additionally, we should call out that the RHS expression in the assignment must only contain literal expressions and that string interpolation isn't supported in this context as these are global declarations.

Exactly. I can see a map being useful: for example, perhaps you have an enum that can help you scatter over _all_ contigs versus just a defined list of canonical contigs.

That being said, perhaps it's not required to explicitly define non-primitive types as well. For instance, the above is unequivocally resolvable to the `Array[String]`—would it be fair to just say the type must be unambiguously resolved?

I'll add the clarification on string interpolation.

Reviewer: It should be unambiguous to deduce a type or otherwise error; the only catch is `File` and `Directory` since they don't have a literal type (but otherwise coerce from `String` just fine).

Author: In the latest commit, I've:

- Updated the example to be something that wouldn't resolve.
- Clarified what should happen if a `String` that looks like a `File` or `Directory` is passed in to an implicitly typed enum.

An enum definition is a top-level WDL element, meaning it is defined at the same level as tasks, workflows, and structs, and it cannot be defined within a task or workflow body. An enum is defined using the `enum` keyword, followed by a name that is unique within the WDL document, and a body containing a comma-delimited list of variants in braces (`{}`). Variant names within an enum must be unique, and enum names must not conflict with struct names or other enum names.

```wdl
enum Color {
  Red,
  Blue,
  Green
}
```

An enum can be thought of as a closed type with a fixed set of instances. The `enum` keyword creates both a type (that can be used in declarations) and a global namespace containing the enum's variants. For example, `Color.Red` refers to a specific instance of the `Color` enum type.

Unlike structs, it is not possible to create new instances of an `enum` outside of the enum's definition. An enum value can only be one of the variants defined in the enum's declaration.

### Enum Usage

> An `enum`'s variants are [accessed](#member-access) using a `.` to separate the variant name from the `enum`'s identifier.

Reviewer: So this is tricky to implement properly without either further expansion of the _value space_ of WDL or specifically defining the access (dot) expression grammar to support enumerations (however, the latter is _ambiguous_, I'll explain why in a sec).

In the current grammar of WDL, the access expression is effectively:

```ebnf
access-expr := expr '.' ident => value
```

Given that the LHS of the expression is itself an expression, the expression must produce a _value_.

The expression could be a _name reference_ expression (e.g. `foo`), which produces the _value_ of the name from the current scope.

A type name (e.g. a `Color` enum) doesn't have a corresponding _value_ in WDL. We would have to extend the WDL value space by adding a "type reference" value to be able to access it with the _current_ WDL grammar rules.

One might attempt to _special case_ the access expression by amending the rule to be:

```ebnf
access-expr := (ident | expr) '.' ident => value
```

However, that is ambiguous because `expr` can be `ident` in the case of a name reference expression so it is unclear from the grammar alone whether it is a special-case access on a type name or an access on a named _value_.

We _could_ define the access expression in terms of "if the LHS `expr` happens to _directly_ be a name reference expression that names an enum type, access it; otherwise, if it's any other expression, evaluate it and access the produced _value_" but that seems brittle to me (or, at the very least, should be specifically discussed for the semantics of the access expression).

Another alternative would to _not_ use the dot operator here, but instead some other novel syntax specifically for accessing a type (e.g. `Color::Red`) where the grammar rule could be:

```ebnf
variant-ref-expr := ident '::' ident => value (specifically an enum value)
```

Reviewer: Related to this issue, currently one may have a declaration name that _shadows_ a custom type name, as the naming rules for declarations is specified as:

> Each declaration must be unique within its scope, and may not collide with a [reserved WDL keyword](https://github.com/openwdl/wdl/blob/wdl-1.2/SPEC.md#reserved-keywords) (e.g., workflow, or input).

Currently Sprocket accepts this (although `miniwdl` does not):

```wdl
version 1.3

struct Foo {
    Int x
}

workflow example {
    input {
        # `Foo` is unique within its scope and isn't a reserved keyword 
        String Foo
    }
}
```

Unless I missed somewhere else in the spec that says a declaration name cannot shadow a custom type name, then we _definitely_ need to add such language to the spec to properly support using an access expression on an enum, otherwise:

```wdl
version 1.3

enum Foo {
    Foo,
    Bar,
    Baz,
}

struct Bar {
    Int x
}

workflow example {
    input {
        Bar Foo = Bar { x: 1 }
    }

    Int x = Foo.x # ???
}
```

Reviewer: I'd also suggest adding a line to this paragraph to the effect of:

> The access expression produces an _enum value_ specific to the named variant and not the value associated with the variant (see the [`value()`](#-value) standard library function for retrieving a variant's associated value).

I think that might help clear up some confusion.

Author: One thing to consider was this comment from @DavyCats:

> I think adding a new operator like `::` would make the language look more intimidating to non programmers (and maybe even more casual programmers not familiar with Rust or R).

I tend to agree with that, but I don't know what a better operator would be.

Reviewer: I'm okay with using the access expression, but we need to better codify how it's expected to work and that it's a bit of a hack around the grammar (granted, we're not terribly formal with the WDL grammar definition to begin with).

What we could do to make it less of a hack is to formalize the name reference expression and extend the WDL value space with a "type reference value". If the name refers to a name in scope, the expression produces the value of that name. If the name refers to a visible _type name_, then it produces a _type reference value_. Otherwise, it's an unknown name error.

The access expression would then work exactly like it does today for accessing a field of a value, except the addition of enumerations means one can access a type reference value of an enum by variant name to produce an _enum value_.

This would also allow us to define functions such as `variants(T) -> Array[String] where T: EnumTypeRef` (i.e. any type reference value referring to an enum; an example call to the function would be `variants(Color)`).

Reviewer: After some discussion with Clay, I think the best approach for the initial feature is:

* Use `.` for accessing an enum to produce an _enum value_ (we already use `.` for "accessing" namespaces in call statements, for example).
* Explicitly call out in this section that the LHS expression of the access expression must:
  * Be _exactly_ a name reference expression to a name that is _not_ in scope but is a visible enum type name.
  * Currently prohibit an expression like `(Color).Red` due to the above requirement; one would expect the inner name reference expression to error if `Color` isn't a name _in scope_ (for now at least).
 * Do not yet introduce a "type reference" value into the WDL value system in 1.3.

Like with how we punted on a `variants` stdlib function, I think the above would allow us to later introduce a "type reference" value in a backwards compatible way; if suddenly the expression `Color` produced such a value, then the expression `Color.Red` would behave like the special-cased name reference access defined in this proposal (additionally, `(Color).Red` would then be a semantically identical expression).

For future consideration, an alternative to introducing a "type reference value" into the value system would be to support methods (i.e. stdlib functions scoped to a type, e.g. `Color::variants()` or some such).

Reviewer 2: I like this as a compromise, especially as it allows us to ship enums without closing out the future to the improvements you are suggesting

Author: In the implementation in Sprocket, we ended up just going the whole 9 yards and (a) formalizing type name references and (b) allowing these to be evaluated as part of expressions. This was largely because hacking in access expressions for these seemed weird and was ultimately probably going to be more difficult (i.e., internal accounting) than just doing it the "proper way". So I'm going to amend the RFC to formalize that concept and make clear that type name references are a new part of the type system.

I should note that I also surveyed the code for miniwdl and Cromwell before making this decision—both of them have code similar to Sprocket's for type such that I imagined this implementation would be easier than hacking it in. So there was due diligence done there.

A declaration with an `enum` type can only be initialized by referencing a variant directly or by assigning it to the value of another declaration of the same `enum` type.

> Two enum values can be tested for equality (i.e., using `==` or `!=`). To be equal, two enum values must be the same variant of the same `enum` type. For example, `Color.Red == Color.Red` evaluates to `true`, while `Color.Red == Color.Blue` evaluates to `false`. Even if two different enum variants have the same inner value, they are not equal (though their inner values extracted via `value()` may be equal). Enum variants are not ordered, so they cannot be compared (i.e., using `>`, `>=`, `<`, `<=`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two enum values can be tested for equality (i.e., using `==` or `!=`). To be equal, two enum values must be the same variant of the same `enum` type. For example, `Color.Red == Color.Red` evaluates to `true`, while `Color.Red == Color.Blue` evaluates to `false`. A comparison of two enum values of different `enum` types is considered a type mismatch error. Enum values are not ordered, so they cannot be compared with ordinal operators (i.e., using `>`, `>=`, `<`, `<=`).
```

Two enum values can be tested for equality (i.e., using `==` or `!=`). To be equal, two enum values must be the same variant of the same `enum` type. Enum variants are not ordered, so they cannot be compared (i.e., using `>`, `>=`, `<`, `<=`).

When an enum value is serialized (for example, in a command section using string interpolation), it is serialized to its inner value. To access the stringified variant name, use the [`name()`](#name) standard library function.

An `enum` cannot be coerced to or from any other type. However, an enum value can be [serialized to/deserialized from a `String`]() or to/from [JSON]().

```wdl
version 1.2
enum Pet {
  Cat,
  Mouse,
  Bird
}
enum ComputerDevice {
  Mouse,
  Keyboard,
  Monitor
}
task compare_enum_types {
  input {
    Pet? pet
  }

  Pet my_pet = select_first([pet, Pet.Mouse])
  Array[String] all_pet_names = names(Pet)

  command <<<
    echo "There are ~{length(all_pet_names)} kinds of pet: ~{sep(", ", all_pet_names)}"
    echo "I have a pet ~{name(my_pet)}"
    echo "My pet is a ~{my_pet}"
  >>>

  output {

>     Boolean different_types = Pet.Mouse != ComputerDevice.Mouse

Reviewer 2: @claymcleod what are the rules around equality? Would this always evaluate to `true` or Is this effectively equivalent to `value(Pet.Mouse) != value(ComputerDevice.Mouse)` which would be false?

Author: In my mind, it is not equivalent to `value(Pet.Mouse) != value(ComputerDevice.Mouse)`, because the values within each variant do not constitute the entire identity of the value (though you can get the inner values out of variants and compare equality that way, if that's what you desire).

I can illustrate the core idea this way using existing valid WDL: consider two structs, each with a single member `foo: String` with a value `"bar"`; though the constituent data within the structs are identical, the fact that they are typed different necessitates the inequality because the type is part of the identity.

Reviewer 5: Given the current behavior around comparisons of different types, where Sprocket fails to validate `==` operations with different types, why would the above line be valid WDL? Although `Pet` and `ComputerDevice` are both `enum` they are different types, which should make their comparison invalid.

Example of the current spec behavior:
```console
$  cat tmp.wdl
version 1.2

workflow equality {
    input {
        Int five = 5
        String foo = "foo"
    }

    output {
        Boolean equals = five == foo
    }
}
$  sprocket check tmp.wdl
error: type mismatch: operator `==` cannot compare type `Int` to type `String`
   ┌─ tmp.wdl:10:26
   │
10 │         Boolean equals = five == foo
   │                          ^^^^^^^^^^^
   │                          │       │
   │                          │       this is type `String`
   │                          this is type `Int`

error: failing due to 1 error
```

----------

I also want to make sure I'm fully understanding this PR/comment thread: How does `value(Pet.Mouse) != value(ComputerDevice.Mouse)` evaluate? To `true` or to `false`? I expect the LHS and RHS to both evaluate to `"Mouse"`, making the expression valid WDL evaluating to `false` due to the `!=` operator.

Reviewer: I am also of the opinion that we should treat the above comparison as a _static_ type mismatch and thus _not evaluable_, similar to what Ari said and also:

```
version 1.1

struct Foo {
    Int x
}

struct Bar {
    Int x
}

workflow test {
    Foo a = Foo { x: 1 }
    Bar b = Bar { x: 1 }

    output {
        Boolean eq = a == b
    }
}
```

Author: Yeah, that makes sense—I must have missed coming back to this and updating after my Sprocket implementation (where this does not compile), so I'll update this.

And yes, Ari, your understanding of the evaluation using `value` is correct.

  }
}
```

### Enum Serialization and Deserialization

Enum values are serialized and deserialized differently depending on the context.

> #### JSON Input and Output

Reviewer 2: I also am not 100% sold on the asymmetrical approach here. It feels like command is the exception and not the rule. Which means someone will make a mistake.

It feels like there should be consistency to the usage and behaviour of the enum.

Another question then,in a task definition, how does one deserialize an enum?

In other languages there are things like `valueOf`. Also what is the result of `read_json()`?

Author: I've responded to the part on the asymmetrical approach above.

WRT deserializing an enum in a task definition, I'm not sure what you mean by that. Can you give me an example of what you'd be trying to do?

When an enum value appears in JSON input or output files, it is represented by its **variant name** (not its inner value). The variant name is specified as a string without the enum type prefix.

For example, given this enum:

```wdl
enum Color {
  Red = "#FF0000",
  Green = "#00FF00",
  Blue = "#0000FF"
}

workflow example {
  input {
    Color favorite_color
  }

  output {
    Color result = favorite_color
  }
}
```

**Input JSON** uses the variant name:

```json
{
  "example.favorite_color": "Red"
}
```

**Output JSON** also uses the variant name:

```json
{
  "example.result": "Red"
}
```

The execution engine validates that the provided string matches one of the enum's variant names. If an invalid variant name is provided, the execution engine must raise an error during input validation.

#### Command Section Serialization

> When an enum value is serialized in a command section using string interpolation, it is serialized to its **inner value** (not the variant name). This allows enum variants to have meaningful values for use in commands.

Reviewer 2: You should probably say that it uses the typed typed value first, or the name of the variant if it is not a typed value.

Although, this type of am iguity leads me to wonder if explicit access to the variant is clearer here

Author: Technically in the current proposal, variants with no value are implicitly typed with `String` values of the same name as the variant. So it's not so much that there's ambiguity here as there is magic at work. But, that being said, perhaps explicit selection of the name or value is good. 

The open question then is really whether we want to do `variant.name`/`variant.value` or `name(variant)`/`value(variant)`. On my first look at it, I'm thinking the former to match `.left` and `.right` of pair, but curious what you think.

Author: In fact, I think the most logical thing might actually be to default to serializing/deserializing the name and just allowing access to the value with `value(variant)`.
